RECALL
Addiction Architecture, Psychology, and Implementation Plan
Compiled from strategy sessions — June 2026
Built by Priyanshu Gumber (PriyanshuG27)
github.com/PriyanshuG27/Recall

Table of Contents



Part 0 — Where This Stands Today
This document consolidates five working sessions into one reference: the gap between what exists in the Recall codebase and what the vision doc proposes, the psychology behind why these mechanics would actually work, the exact copy and message design that delivers that psychology, the system architecture that lets all of it share one pipeline instead of four redundant ones, a brutally honest market assessment of whether this gets used at all, the cold-start fix that assessment surfaced as the actual blocker, and a build order tied to the real schema.
Read this as the single source of truth going forward. Where this document and the two source docs (recall-vision-doc.md, app_state_analysis.md) disagree, this document wins — it reflects the corrected, stress-tested version of the thinking.
What Is Actually Built (verified against app_state_analysis.md)
The infrastructure is real and tested: FastAPI backend on Render, Telegram webhook ingestion, Redis task queue, Neon Postgres with pgvector HNSW search, an AI cascade (Modal GPU → Groq → Gemini Flash → bookmark fallback), Louvain clustering into semantic_hubs, a Three.js constellation graph, SuperMemo-2 spaced repetition, Google Drive backup, and 309 backend + 83 frontend tests.
None of the addiction mechanics in the vision doc are built. The current streak_count is a single global counter based on daily saves — not the per-cluster thinking-streak the vision doc describes. The daily_digest_sender sends a static summary — not a Zeigarnik-gap message. There is no Pulse score, no Recall Moment, no Mind Type, no Cluster Portrait, no Monthly Prediction, no Confession Feature, no Thought Compatibility, no node temperature/decay, and no Weekly Card.
Core Correction 1 — Insight Quality Is the Real Moat
The vision doc's addiction mechanics are sound in direction but assume the AI cascade will deliver specific, correct, identity-relevant insight by default once wired up. It will not. Generic insight is the default output of an LLM asked to summarize a cluster. Specific, uncomfortable, correct insight is a much harder target that needs its own evaluation loop, prompt engineering, and quality gate — built and proven before any user-facing mechanic ships on top of it.
The one sentence that should govern build order:
Every mechanic in this document is delivery wrapper around one core capability: can the AI cascade reliably produce a sentence about a specific person’s saved items that reads as ‘no one but me could have written this about me’? If yes, every mechanic below works. If no, every mechanic below is decoration on a broken core, and shipping them will burn user trust permanently per Risk 1 in the original vision doc.
Core Correction 2 — The Reward System Has No On-Ramp
A later, separately-run honest market assessment of this plan surfaced a deeper structural problem than insight quality: every mechanic in Parts 1–3 requires the user to have already built a habit of sending Recall things before any mechanic can activate. Pulse decays, streaks decay, Recall Moment needs enough nodes to find a connection — none of this creates the habit it depends on. This is the actual reason “use it continuously” is a much bigger ask than the original document treated it as, and it's why Part 3.5 (cold start) was added after the rest of this document was otherwise complete — read it as load-bearing, not as an appendix.
The corrected one sentence:
An addiction architecture built entirely on rewards for curatorial effort cannot create the habit of curating in the first place. Part 3.5 exists to solve specifically that — getting a new user to enough nodes, inside days rather than an indefinite self-motivated week, that the rest of this document's mechanics have real material to work with.

Part 1 — The Psychology Layer
Three psychological systems make products addictive on their own. Recall is one of the few products where stacking all three doesn’t require manipulating the user against their own interest, because the subject matter — self-knowledge — is something deep engagement is actually good for. That distinction matters and is maintained throughout this document: every mechanic below is designed to work better on someone who is doing fine than on someone in a fragile place. Mechanics that invert this (working harder on someone who is vulnerable) are explicitly excluded.
1.1 Variable Reward — and the Missing Third Component
Slot-machine-grade variable reward needs three things simultaneously: a low-effort repeatable trigger behavior, unpredictable reward timing, and near-misses. Recall’s Recall Moment and Drift Window mechanics (defined below) satisfy the first two. Near-misses — the highest-leverage missing piece — are not designed anywhere in the original vision doc.
Near-miss design: surface connections that almost crossed the similarity threshold, not just ones that did. “Your graph almost made a connection — save one more thing in this space and it might cross” converts the user from passive recipient to active participant trying to close a gap they can see. This is structurally the same mechanism that makes Wordle and crosswords pull harder than a quiz with the answer shown immediately — and unlike a slot machine's near-miss, closing this one means the user actually engaged with an idea, which is a good outcome regardless of whether they return tomorrow.
The calibration risk: the near-miss threshold band is a single tunable parameter (e.g., flag any pair scoring between 0.68–0.75 cosine similarity, where 0.75 is the confirmed-connection cutoff). Too wide and it's obviously manufactured — trust dies immediately, which is fatal for an introspective product. Too narrow and it almost never fires. This must be calibrated empirically against real graph data, not guessed.
Worked example of why the band matters concretely: imagine a user with 40 items. A typical cross-cluster pair might score 0.40–0.55 (genuinely unrelated), with maybe 8–12 pairs naturally landing in any given week somewhere in the 0.60–0.70 range as clusters grow close to each other through ordinary saving. If the near-miss band is set at 0.55–0.75 (too wide), most of those 8–12 pairs qualify, and the user gets a near-miss message almost every day — it stops feeling like a meaningful signal and starts feeling like noise, exactly the failure mode that makes people mute notifications within two weeks. A band of 0.71–0.75 instead might only produce 1–2 genuine near-misses a week, which is the actual target rate for the mechanism to feel rare and meaningful. The exact numbers will differ per user's graph density — this is why Part 5, Phase 3.3 specifies an empirical recalibration procedure rather than locking these numbers in now.
1.2 The Identity Loop — Why This Beats Horoscopes Structurally
Horoscopes and MBTI are bottomless because of the Barnum effect: vague-enough statements trigger the reader's own memory to search for confirming evidence, producing a false sense of accuracy. Recall's structural advantage is that it has ground truth — real saved items — so it can be specific and correct instead of vague and flattering. Specific-and-correct is a strictly stronger hook than vague-and-flattering, and it's the one no horoscope, MBTI test, or therapist working from self-report can produce.
Three components have to be present for the identity loop to compound instead of plateau after one or two uses:
A label — humans anchor identity to nameable categories. “I'm a Connector” is shareable in a way “high cross-domain clustering coefficient” never will be.
A trajectory — Mind Type must keep changing weekly. A static label gets boring fast (this is the actual reason MBTI plateaus after the first use). The change itself is the hook, not the label.
A discrepancy signal — identity-confirming content satisfies once. Identity-challenging content that turns out true creates the strongest return behavior, because it forces cognitive dissonance resolution: integrate the new information, or reject the source. Evidence-backed claims are much harder to reject than the same claim from a person.
The deepest insight here: insights about tensions outrank insights about traits. “You're a Connector” is flattering and forgettable. “You save things about discipline right after things about freedom, every time” is uncomfortable and unforgettable, because tensions are where people actually live. Every insight-generation prompt in the system should be explicitly optimized to find tension-pairs across clusters, not single-cluster summaries.
Hard boundary on the identity loop — not optional, not a style choice:
No insight may imply a clinical or diagnostic read of the user's mental state. “You're trying to resolve a guilt loop” (from the original vision doc) sits right on this line. Keep every insight at the level of ‘here is a pattern in what you saved,’ never ‘here is what's actually going on with you psychologically.’ An app that narrates a user's subconscious motivations back to them with high authority is genuinely risky for anyone in a fragile state, and this risk grows as the insight quality improves — not shrinks.
1.3 Social Proof and Virality — Why the Standard Playbook Is Wrong Here
Standard growth-hacking social proof (“10,000 people did this today”, urgency banners, fake scarcity) is tonally wrong for this product and will be seen through instantly by the target user — intellectually self-aware people are the worst possible audience for manipulative social proof, and the entire product's premise (this app tells me true things about myself) collapses the moment the user catches it lying about anything, including growth tactics.
What actually works: identity-as-social-currency. People share content to manage how others perceive them, not to inform others. Spotify Wrapped is shared because ‘my taste is interesting’ is identity-affirming to broadcast, not because anyone cares what a friend's top artist was. Recall's version carries higher stakes — intellectual identity is a more guarded currency than music taste for this specific audience (CS students, builders) — which means fewer shares, but each one carries more weight and pulls in higher-intent friends who already self-select as the kind of person who'd want this.
Thought Compatibility's real mechanism: interpersonal self-disclosure escalation. An external, evidence-backed source naming something about a relationship (“you go wide, they go deep”) gives both people permission to discuss something they each perceived but never articulated. This doesn't just get shared — it changes a real conversation, embedding the product in memory of an actual relationship event rather than a screenshot. That is categorically stickier than screenshot-bait.
1.4 The Unifying Mechanism Underneath All Three
All three systems above compete for the same neural resource: attention allocated to self-relevant information, which is processed by a dedicated, privileged attention pathway (self-referential processing) that other content does not get routed through. This is why a person will read a low-quality quiz result about themselves with more attention than a well-written article about the world.
The practical implication — this is the actual product:
Insight generation quality is the entire moat. Every mechanic in Part 3 is delivery wrapper. A perfectly engineered Drift Window delivering a generic insight is worthless; a plain-text Telegram message delivering one true, specific, tension-revealing insight will hook a user on its own. This is why the evaluation loop in Part 4 is not a prerequisite step before the real work — it is the real work.

Part 2 — The Copywriting Layer
Every message Recall sends is a delivery vehicle for the psychology in Part 1. The copy principles below are not style guidance — each one maps directly to a mechanism. Breaking a rule here breaks the mechanism it serves, even if the message still sounds fine.
2.1 The Five Copy Rules
Specificity over scope. Never write “you seem interested in technology.” Always name the exact items, the exact gap in days, the exact cluster label. Generic language is not a tone problem — it is the failure mode Risk 1 in the original vision doc identifies as fatal.
State the tension, not the trait. Lead with the contradiction between two saved clusters, not a summary of one. “You save discipline content right after freedom content” outperforms “You're interested in self-improvement” every time.
Withhold the resolution once per loop. Every message that opens a loop (Morning Mystery, Drift Window) must not name the insight in the same message. The gap is the mechanism — closing it immediately kills the Zeigarnik effect.
Never use enthusiasm punctuation or hype words. No exclamation marks, no “amazing,” no “incredible.” The product's credibility depends on sounding like a quiet, precise observer — not a marketer. Hype language signals manipulation to the exact audience this product targets.
State uncertainty when it exists. If a prediction or pattern claim is below a confidence bar, say so plainly (“this might be early — only two data points so far”) rather than overstating it. False confidence destroys trust faster than no insight at all.
2.2 Message Templates by Mechanic
Morning Mystery (opens the loop)
Your graph did something unusual overnight. Three things you saved in different weeks just collapsed into the same idea. I haven't told you what it is yet.
Constraints: no named clusters, no hint at the theme, no question mark (a question invites a reply; this should sit as a closed statement that opens an unclosed loop).
Evening Answer (closes the loop)
The idea your graph kept circling for six weeks: what happens when systems lose accountability. You connected it to Chernobyl, your exam grading process, and a founder burnout post. You didn't know. Your graph did.
Constraints: must name the literal saved items, not paraphrase them into abstraction. The specificity of the source material is what makes the close land; the theme phrase alone is not enough.
Near-Miss (Variable Reward, Section 1.1)
Your graph almost made a connection. Something from three days ago is sitting at 71% similarity with [Cluster]. One more save in this space and it might cross.
Constraints: always state the literal percentage or a plain-language equivalent (“close but not there yet”), never round up to imply a connection exists. Rounding up here is a credibility-destroying lie the moment the user checks the graph.
Recall Moment (Viral Trigger)
Nine weeks apart. Something about a basketball player's obsession with fundamentals. Something about a memory technique for learning. Recall noticed: you've been trying to solve the same problem about mastery since September. You never connected them.
Constraints: maximum once a week, irregular timing. If it fires on a schedule, it reads as automated and the mechanism (gift, not notification) collapses.
Drift Window (Urgency — new mechanic, Part 3.1)
Your graph is about to drift. The link between [Cluster A] and [Cluster B] has roughly six hours before Recall stops treating it as a live pattern. After that it goes back to noise.
Constraints: the countdown must be literal and real — backed by an actual expires_at timestamp the system enforces (see Part 3.1). A fake countdown that never actually expires is detectable within a few cycles and destroys the entire urgency mechanic permanently once caught.
Confession Feature (Tension/Discrepancy)
You've described yourself as someone who prioritizes health. Your saves have zero nodes about sleep, food, or exercise in three months. Your actual recurring subjects: [three clusters]. You already know this.
Constraints: must reference something the user said about themselves (onboarding, a context-prompt reply) — not assume a generic claim. Inventing a self-description the user never made is dishonest and will read as such immediately.
Mind Type Shift (Identity Trajectory)
You were a Depth Seeker for six weeks. This week your graph started making cross-domain links it hadn't made before. The type now reads Connector. Something opened up.
Constraints: only fire on an actual computed shift, never on a schedule. A weekly cron that announces “you are still a Connector” every week trains the user to ignore the message type entirely.
2.3 The Banned Phrase List (enforce this literally, not as a vibe)
These exact phrase patterns are the most common LLM defaults toward generic output. Treat any generated message containing one of these as an automatic fail in the Part 4 rubric, regardless of any other quality:
“You seem interested in…” / “You have a passion for…” — trait language, not tension language (Part 1.2)
“This might suggest…” / “It's possible that…” / “Perhaps you…” — hedging that undercuts the calibrated-confidence rule
“Your journey” / “your growth” / “your path” — generic self-help register, signals a template, not an observation
Any sentence that would still make sense if you swapped in a different user's items — if the sentence survives the swap, it failed Groundedness (Part 4.5) regardless of phrasing
“This reveals” / “this shows that you’re someone who…” followed by a personality trait — restate as a pattern in saved items instead, per the diagnostic-language boundary in Part 1.2
2.4 The One Line This Document Should Never Forget

Every other app shows you content from the world. Recall shows you content from yourself — content you've been creating without knowing it. That's inexhaustible, and unlike any feed, it's 100% relevant to you by definition. Every message template above exists only to deliver that one sentence convincingly, one specific instance at a time.

Part 3 — Unified System Design
The mechanics in Parts 1 and 2 look like ten separate features. They are not. Built naively, this becomes four redundant similarity-scanning systems (Recall Moment, Drift Window, near-miss detection, Cluster Portrait) each re-running cosine comparisons on the same data on different schedules. Built correctly, they share one pipeline.
3.1 The Insight Candidate Pipeline (single source for every mechanic)
One nightly job (extending the existing louvain_clustering cron, not a new job) produces a ranked list of insight candidates. Every user-facing mechanic in Part 2 is a different filter and delivery wrapper over this same candidate list — nothing downstream re-scans the graph.
Pairwise scan: for all item pairs within a user's graph saved more than N days apart, compute cosine similarity (already indexed via the existing HNSW pgvector index — no new infrastructure).
Bucket by score: ≥ 0.75 → confirmed connection (feeds Recall Moment / Cluster Portrait). 0.68–0.75 → near-miss (feeds the near-miss mechanic in 2.2). Below 0.68 → discard.
Novelty filter: discard any pair whose cluster-pairing has fired before for this user within the last 60 days. This is the fix to the original vision doc's biggest weakness — raw cosine threshold alone fires on banal repeated overlaps (two startup articles aren't insight) and turns Recall Moment into spam within weeks.
Recency-of-discovery weighting: prioritize candidates where at least one item was saved in the last 7 days — this is what makes an insight feel current rather than archaeological.
Write to insight_candidates table with a status enum: pending, delivered, expired, confirmed. This single table backs Morning Mystery, Drift Window, Recall Moment, and Cluster Portrait — they differ only in which status transitions and which delivery template they use.
3.2 New Schema (additive only — no breaking changes to app_state_analysis.md tables)
Table / Column
Type
Purpose
insight_candidates
new table
Single backing store for every insight-based mechanic (3.1)
  → id, user_id
SERIAL, INT FK
Standard ownership pattern, matches existing tables
  → item_id_a, item_id_b
INT, INT
The two items forming the candidate pair
  → similarity_score
FLOAT
Raw cosine score from the pairwise scan
  → bucket
VARCHAR(20)
confirmed | near_miss
  → status
VARCHAR(20)
pending | delivered | expired | confirmed_by_user
  → expires_at
TIMESTAMP
Powers Drift Window's real countdown — enforced, not cosmetic
  → insight_text
TEXT
Cached LLM-generated phrasing, regenerated only if candidate resurfaces
semantic_hubs.last_active_at
new column
Per-cluster last item timestamp — powers thinking-streaks (3.3), avoids a new table
semantic_hubs.streak_days
new column
Computed on read from last_active_at vs. now — avoids a nightly write job
users.mind_type
new column
Cached current Mind Type, recomputed weekly by the existing scheduler pattern
users.pulse_score
new column
Cached Pulse value, recomputed alongside louvain_clustering

Note on the streak correction (Part 0): the existing users.streak_count column tracks daily saves globally. It is left untouched for backward compatibility, but no addiction mechanic in this document reads from it — thinking-streaks are computed per-cluster from semantic_hubs.last_active_at instead, per the original vision doc's own correction of “track thinking consistency, not saving frequency.”
3.3 How the Pieces Actually Interlock
The dependency order below is a system map, not a build order (that's Part 4). It shows why building these out of order causes rework.
The one-sentence context prompt (existing item ingestion path) feeds insight_text quality for every downstream mechanic — it must exist before any insight generation is evaluated, or the eval in Part 4 is testing the wrong input.
The Insight Candidate Pipeline (3.1) is upstream of: Morning Mystery, Recall Moment, Drift Window, near-miss messaging, and Cluster Portrait. Building any of these as a standalone scanner duplicates the pairwise-scan cost (already the most expensive operation in the system, even with HNSW indexing) for no benefit.
semantic_hubs.last_active_at (3.2) is upstream of: thinking-streaks and the loss-aversion messaging in the original vision doc's Mechanic 2. It depends on nothing else and can be built independently.
Mind Type and Pulse Score both depend on a stable semantic_hubs clustering result — they should be computed in the same scheduled job as louvain_clustering, immediately after clusters update, not in a separate cron that risks reading stale cluster data.
Confession Feature and Thought Compatibility both depend on the user having stated something about themselves (onboarding question, or an explicit self-description prompt) — this input does not exist anywhere in the current schema and must be added before either mechanic can be built honestly (see Part 5, Phase 4).

Part 3.4 — Honest Market Assessment: Will People Actually Use This
This section is deliberately blunt. It exists because every section before it assumes the addiction architecture works if built correctly — this section checks that assumption against current market reality before any more engineering time goes in.
3.4.1 The Core Problem: A Reward System With No On-Ramp
Recall requires the user to do the work that creates the value, and that work is the exact behavior the product is trying to make addictive. Pulse decays, streaks decay, and every insight mechanic only fires after deliberate, effortful saving with a one-sentence context note. This is circular in a way that kills most knowledge-tool retention: the addictive behavior (opening Recall) and the value-creating behavior (curating and annotating) are not the same action, unlike TikTok (scrolling and watching are identical) or Duolingo (opening the app requires roughly 90 seconds of low-effort recall, not active curation).
This is not a hypothetical concern. Rosebud — a comparable AI self-reflection product — found through its own user research that when life is going well, most journaling apps give you nothing to do, and that's the built-in churn mechanism. Recall has the identical structure: a quiet week with nothing notable saved produces a decaying Pulse score and a cooling graph regardless of whether the user did anything wrong, which reads as a nag dressed up as a mirror.
3.4.2 Who Actually Sticks With This
The niche is real, not zero. Rosebud's Q1 2026 self-reported research, based on 11,000 users, found 83% of subscribers are or were recently in therapy — self-aware, growth-oriented people already investing seriously in themselves. That is Recall's actual addressable user: smaller than “intellectually obsessive people” as originally scoped, but a real, demonstrated-willingness-to-pay segment.
However, the direction the comparable market has moved is informative and slightly contrary to Recall's current design. The most-cited AI journaling products in 2026 — Life Note, Rosebud, Reflection, and Mindsera — each take a different approach to the same question of how AI should help someone understand themselves, but the common thread across all four is active, guided interaction (conversation, follow-up questions, structured prompts), not passive inference from incidentally-saved content. A study found AI-guided journaling increased self-reported emotional clarity by 34% over unguided journaling across 8 weeks — the guided, conversational mechanism is what's validated in this category, not silent graph-watching.
3.4.3 What This Means for the Document So Far
The honest verdict:
This will not become a daily habit for a general audience, because the product currently asks for curatorial effort before it gives anything back — the opposite of how addictive products actually work. It can become a genuinely sticky tool for a narrow, already self-aware, already paying-for-self-improvement-tools niche, but only if the first session requires near-zero curatorial effort rather than days of unprompted manual saving before the addiction mechanics have anything to work with.
This is the reasoning that produced Part 3.5. The fix is not a fifteenth mechanic layered on top of Parts 1–3 — it's removing the precondition that makes all of those mechanics conditional on an effort most people will not sustain unprompted.

Part 3.5 — The Cold-Start Fix
Every mechanic in Parts 1–3 activates only after a user has already built a habit of sending Recall things. None of them can create that habit — they're rewards for behavior that hasn't started yet. This is the actual blocker, identified late in the strategy process but logically prior to Phase 1: a reward system with no on-ramp doesn't get used long enough for the rewards to matter.
The honest constraint this section works within:
Most of Recall's likely users are WhatsApp-habituated, not Telegram-habituated. WhatsApp has no bot API for reading existing saved messages — Meta blocks it, and the original vision doc already confirmed this is a dead end, not a gap to revisit. There is no clever workaround that reads a user's existing WhatsApp Saved Messages programmatically. The only bridge is the user manually taking screenshots and sending them to the Telegram bot — real friction, not solved friction, and this section treats it honestly as such rather than dressing it up as seamless.
3.5.1 The WhatsApp Screenshot Bridge (cold start, manual but minimized)
Onboarding asks for the smallest possible batch, not a bulk import: “screenshot 5–10 things from your WhatsApp Saved Messages, send them here — doesn't matter what they are.” Five to ten is the deliberate target: enough for first-session magic (Phase 1.2) to have real material to find a connection in, not so many that the ask itself causes drop-off before it starts.
This only works if the batch of screenshots is processed as a coherent set, not as N independent saves — which is exactly the bug described in 3.5.2 below. The cold-start flow and the batching fix are the same engineering problem; solve 3.5.2 first or the WhatsApp bridge produces a noisy, low-quality first impression instead of a magical one.
Frame the ask as low-stakes and reversible in the copy: “this is just to get your graph started — doesn't need to be your best stuff.” Lowering perceived stakes on the very first ask matters more here than for any later interaction, since a user who feels judged on input quality before they've seen any output will simply not finish onboarding.
3.5.2 The Batching / Debounce Fix (fixes cold start AND steady-state)
This is a real bug in the current ingestion design, not just a cold-start patch. Any time a user sends multiple screenshots together — a Twitter thread across 4 images, several saved WhatsApp messages at once, a multi-page PDF photographed in parts — the current pipeline (webhook → LPUSH per message → worker BRPOP → process one task) treats each image as an independent item. Eight screenshots sent in twenty seconds currently produce eight nodes that should have been one to three.
Fix: add a debounce window at the ingestion layer, before anything reaches the AI cascade.
On each incoming message or photo, instead of immediately pushing an ingest task, push the payload to a Redis list keyed batch:{chat_id} and (re)set a short expiry — 4 to 6 seconds, long enough to catch a burst sent in quick succession, short enough that a single deliberate save doesn't feel delayed to the user.
Only when that window closes with no new arrival does the real ingest task get pushed to the existing recall:tasks queue — and it carries the whole accumulated batch as one task, not one task per image.
The worker, on receiving a batch task, runs OCR on every image first, concatenates the extracted text in arrival order, then makes one AI cascade call asking the model to decide: is this one coherent piece of content split across images (a thread, a multi-page document, sequential screenshots of one article), or several unrelated things bundled together? The model returns either one summary and embedding, or a small number of grouped summaries — never one output per image by default.
Why this reduces load rather than adding to it:
Eight screenshots that previously meant eight worker invocations competing for the existing Semaphore(3) slots now mean one slot taken for one larger OCR-plus-LLM call. The debounce window trades a flat 4–6 second delay on every save (invisible in practice — the user isn't watching the chat waiting for a reply) for both correctness on batches and reduced concurrency pressure on exactly the resource already identified as the tightest constraint in the current architecture. The existing 50ms Telegram webhook ACK is unaffected — that's the immediate receipt acknowledgment, a separate concern from when the real ingest task fires.
3.5.3 The Day 1–5 Onboarding Sequence (manufactured contact, not a reward mechanic)
Distinct in kind from every mechanic in Parts 1–3: those are rewards for continued use. This sequence has no insight to deliver yet — its only job is to get a brand-new user through the first week without requiring them to already have the habit the rest of the document assumes. It runs once, only for new accounts, and hands off to the real addiction architecture once a user has enough nodes for Recall Moment or Drift Window to have real material.
Day 1 (same day as first save, a few hours later — not the next morning)
I looked at the thing you sent me. Quick question — was this for you, or were you planning to act on it or share it with someone?
Critical implementation detail: this reply must be mapped back to the exact item it's asking about, never treated as a new save. Recall already knows which item_id this question refers to — it just processed that item hours earlier. Reuse the same pending_context:{chat_id} → item_id Redis key pattern specified for the live one-sentence context prompt (Phase 1.1), with a longer TTL (hours, not minutes, since this is a delayed follow-up rather than an immediate reply window). On webhook receipt, check for a pending mapping for that chat_id before treating the incoming message as a new item; if found, write the reply into that item's context_note column and stop — do not create a sibling row. Creating a new node here would silently double the node count for every onboarding user and corrupt the exact metadata this flow exists to gather.
Day 2 (no save required from the user at all)
Still thinking about [the literal thing they saved on day 1]? I'm not doing anything with it yet — just checking if it's still on your mind, or if it's already done its job.
Same mapping rule as Day 1: this question references the same existing item, so any reply (or lack of one — silence is a valid signal worth logging) maps back to that same item_id via the same pending-context pattern. No new node. The function of this message is presence, not data collection — it breaks the “user has to remember the app exists” problem that kills passive tools, simply by being the first message in this relationship that Recall sent without being fed first.
Day 3–5 (escalates only if the user engaged on Day 1 or 2 — otherwise the sequence stops)
What's one thing you've been meaning to look into but haven't saved anywhere yet?
This message is different in kind from Day 1 and Day 2 and must be built differently: it is explicitly fishing for a second, new node, not a follow-up on the first one. Any reply here should be treated as a new item via the normal save path (creating a fresh row, running it through the AI cascade), not written into the existing item's context_note. Conflating this with the Day 1/2 mapping logic would silently merge two distinct pieces of content into one node's metadata, which is the same category of error in the opposite direction.
The opt-out condition — enforce this as a hard stop, not a soft de-prioritization:
If the user does not reply to either the Day 1 or Day 2 message, do not send Day 3. A user who goes quiet in the first 48 hours has told you the product hasn't earned a second unprompted message yet, and escalating into a third unanswered message is the dark-patterns direction this entire document has tried to avoid — it stops being presence and starts being nagging. Silence is a valid, respected outcome of this sequence, not a failure state to push through.
Hand-off condition: once a user reaches 5 or more nodes (whether through this sequence, the WhatsApp screenshot bridge, or ordinary use), this sequence ends permanently for that account and the Phase 1–3 mechanics (context prompts on new saves, first-session magic, eventually Morning Mystery once enough candidates exist) take over. This sequence is explicitly scaffolding, not a permanent feature — it should feel different in voice from the rest of the product specifically because it's solving a different, temporary problem.
3.5.4 What This Section Does and Does Not Solve
This fixes the specific, tractable problem of getting a new user through their first week without already having the habit the rest of this document assumes. It does not solve long-term retention on its own, and no part of this document should pretend it does — the input-effort tension named in the original product review (the user must curate before the product can reward curation) is structural, not a bug this section patches. What changes is that a stranger now reaches the point where the real addiction architecture has enough material to work with inside days, not inside an indefinite, self-motivated week-over-week habit that most people will never form unprompted.

Part 4 — The Insight-Quality Eval, Prompt, and Rubric
This is the actual deliverable for Phase 0. Not a description of an eval — the eval itself: the exact prompt to run, the exact rubric to grade outputs against, and worked examples of passing and failing output so grading is consistent rather than a vibe check.
4.1 Why This Has to Be This Specific
An instruction like “write a specific, tension-revealing insight” given to an LLM without examples will still produce generic output most of the time, because “specific” and “tension-revealing” are exactly the words a model will interpret loosely under pressure to sound helpful and complete. The fix is not a better adjective. It's few-shot examples that show the model the actual shape of a passing output versus a failing one, plus explicit negative instructions naming the failure mode by example.
4.2 The Input Format (what actually gets fed to the model)
Pull two items flagged by the pairwise scan (Part 3.1) as a candidate pair, plus their context_note (Phase 1 addition, Part 5.1) if present. Do not feed the raw embedding vector to the LLM — it's meaningless to a text model. Feed the structured fields below as JSON in the user message.
{
  "item_a": {
    "title": "The Checklist Manifesto — chapter on aviation failures",
    "summary": "How simple checklists prevented catastrophic pilot error...",
    "context_note": "this is exactly why our exam grading process is broken",
    "saved_at": "2026-04-02",
    "tags": ["systems", "process", "accountability"]
  },
  "item_b": {
    "title": "Chernobyl Disaster — Wikipedia",
    "summary": "Operator error and design flaws compounded under reactor test...",
    "context_note": null,
    "saved_at": "2026-05-21",
    "tags": ["disaster", "engineering", "history"]
  },
  "similarity_score": 0.81,
  "days_apart": 49
}
Note: context_note will frequently be null for older items saved before Phase 1 ships. The prompt below must work acceptably with only title/summary/tags when context_note is absent — do not design a prompt that only works on fully-annotated pairs, since most of a real user's history won't have it for months.
4.3 The System Prompt (Tier 0 / Tier 1 — Llama 3.3 70B, Qwen 2.5 27B)
Use this as the system prompt for the cascade's primary tiers. These models follow few-shot pattern-matching reliably; the structure below leans on that.
SYSTEM:
You are analyzing two items a person saved to their personal knowledge
graph, weeks apart. Your only job is to state the SPECIFIC TENSION OR
RECURRING QUESTION connecting them — not a summary of either item.

RULES (violating any of these is a failed output):
1. Name both items by their literal subject, not a category.
   WRONG: "You've saved content about systems and disasters."
   RIGHT: "You saved a chapter on aviation checklists, then weeks
   later, Chernobyl."
2. State a QUESTION or TENSION the person seems to be circling —
   never a trait or interest label.
   WRONG: "You're interested in systems thinking."
   RIGHT: "What happens when a system has no checks left to fail."
3. If a context_note exists, treat it as the strongest signal of intent
   and weave it in directly — it is the person's own words about why
   this mattered to them.
4. Maximum 3 sentences. No hedging language ("it seems", "perhaps",
   "you might be"). State it as an observation, not a guess.
5. If the two items genuinely share nothing beyond surface topic
   overlap (e.g. both tagged "startups" but no real thematic link),
   output exactly: NO_GENUINE_TENSION — do not force an insight.
6. Never include a diagnostic or psychological label for the person
   (no "anxiety", "avoidance", "control issues", clinical terms of
   any kind). Describe the pattern in what was saved, never the
   person's psychology.

FEW-SHOT EXAMPLES:

Input: item_a="Kobe Bryant's 4am practice routine",
item_b="Feynman technique for learning", 63 days apart
Output: "Kobe's obsession with fundamentals, then weeks later,
Feynman's method for proving you actually understand something.
Both are about the gap between looking competent and being
competent."

Input: item_a="10 best laptop bags 2026", item_b="best
noise-cancelling headphones", 4 days apart
Output: NO_GENUINE_TENSION
4.4 The Fallback Prompt (Tier 2 — Gemini 2.5 Flash)
Flash tends to hedge and over-explain under the same instructions — it needs a stricter output contract. Add this constraint on top of Section 4.3 verbatim when routing to Tier 2:
ADDITIONAL CONSTRAINT FOR THIS MODEL:
Output ONLY the final insight sentence(s) or NO_GENUINE_TENSION.
Do not include any preamble, explanation of your reasoning, or
meta-commentary about the task. The first character of your response
must be the first character of the insight itself.
This constraint is unnecessary for Tier 0/1 in practice but does no harm there — include it in the shared prompt body once validated, rather than maintaining two prompt versions.
4.5 The Grading Rubric
Score every generated output 1–5 on each dimension below. An output only counts as a pass if it scores ≥ 4 on Specificity AND ≥ 4 on Tension AND has zero Diagnostic Language flags. A high score on Fluency or Brevity cannot compensate for a low score on Specificity — this is the dimension Risk 1 in the original vision doc is actually about.
Dimension
Score 1 (fail)
Score 5 (pass)
Specificity
Names a category ("technology", "learning")
Names the literal items and their actual content
Tension framing
States a trait or interest
States a question, contradiction, or recurring gap
Groundedness
Insight could apply to almost any pair of items
Insight only makes sense for this exact pair
Diagnostic language
Uses any clinical/psychological label
Stays at the level of observed pattern, zero labels
Confidence calibration
States a weak signal with false certainty
Matches stated confidence to actual evidence strength

4.6 Worked Examples — Pass and Fail
PASS — scores 5/5/5/5/5
“You saved a piece on aviation checklists with the note ‘this is exactly why our exam grading is broken,’ then seven weeks later, Chernobyl. Both are about what happens when a system runs out of checks.”
Why it passes: names both literal items, uses the context_note directly, states a question rather than a trait, no hedging, no diagnostic framing.
FAIL — scores 1/1/2/5/3
“You seem to have an interest in systems and how things can go wrong. This might reflect a deeper concern with control in your life.”
Why it fails: ‘systems and how things can go wrong’ is a category, not the literal items. ‘Interest in’ is a trait label, not a tension. ‘Deeper concern with control’ is exactly the diagnostic-language violation Part 1.2 prohibits — this single sentence alone is a hard fail regardless of any other score.
4.7 Running the Eval (procedure, not just intent)
Pull 20 real candidate pairs from your own graph using the pairwise scan logic in Part 3.1 (similarity ≥ 0.75, more than 14 days apart — use a wider time gap than production for the eval set specifically, since wide-gap pairs are the hardest case and the one most likely to expose generic output).
Run each pair through the Section 4.3 prompt against whichever tier you're testing. Record the raw output verbatim — do not paraphrase it before grading, paraphrasing hides the model's actual failure modes.
Grade all 20 against the Section 4.5 rubric yourself first, before involving anyone else — you are the actual target user and the only reliable judge of whether an insight about your own graph reads as true.
Count passes. If fewer than 15 of 20 pass (the bar stated in the original plan), do not proceed to Phase 2. Revise the prompt's few-shot examples using your specific failure cases as new negative examples, and rerun.
Once ≥ 15/20 pass on Tier 0/1, repeat the same 20 pairs against the Tier 2 fallback prompt (Section 4.4) to confirm the fallback path doesn't silently degrade quality — this matters because Tier 2 is what fires under load, exactly when you have the most users watching.

Part 5 — Implementation Plan
Ordered for retention impact per the dependency map in Part 3.3, with Phase 1 now led by the cold-start fixes from Part 3.5 — these are more foundational than the original context-prompt-first ordering, since they determine whether a new user ever reaches the point where any later mechanic has material to work with. Each phase below specifies the actual schema change, the actual query or job logic, and the actual parameters — not just the feature name.
Phase 1 — Foundation
1.0 — Batching / Debounce Fix (build this first, before anything else in Phase 1)
Implements Part 3.5.2. Add the batch:{chat_id} Redis list with 4–6 second debounce expiry in the webhook handler, ahead of the existing LPUSH to recall:tasks. Update the worker to accept a batch payload (list of image/text items) and run one OCR-and-grouping pass instead of one task per image. This is a prerequisite for 1.0a below, since the WhatsApp screenshot bridge is unusable without it — a user who sends 8 screenshots and gets 8 disconnected nodes back will not trust the product enough to continue onboarding.
1.0a — WhatsApp Screenshot Bridge (cold start)
Implements Part 3.5.1. Add an onboarding state for new accounts: first bot message asks for 5–10 WhatsApp Saved Messages screenshots, framed as low-stakes (“doesn't need to be your best stuff”). No new schema beyond what 1.0 already requires — these screenshots flow through the same batched ingestion path as any other multi-image send.
1.0b — The Day 1–5 Onboarding Sequence
Implements Part 3.5.3. New scheduled job (extends the existing APScheduler pattern, app_state_analysis.md Section 5) checking for accounts created 1, 2, or 3–5 days ago with fewer than 5 total items. Day 1 and Day 2 messages map replies to the existing item via pending_context:{chat_id}, exactly as in 1.1 below but with an hours-long TTL instead of minutes. Day 3–5 messages route any reply through the normal new-item save path instead — do not reuse the pending-context mapping for this message, since conflating the two would merge unrelated content into one node's metadata. Hard-stop condition: no Day 3 message if Day 1 and Day 2 both went unanswered. Sequence ends permanently once the account reaches 5 nodes by any path.
1.1 — One-Sentence Context Prompt (steady-state, not onboarding)
Schema: add context_note TEXT NULL to items. Flow change: in the Telegram webhook handler, after the existing ingest acknowledgment, send a single follow-up message: “what's interesting about this to you — one sentence?” Store the user's next message as context_note on the just-created item, matched by chat_id within a 10-minute window (use a short-TTL Redis key like pending_context:{chat_id} = item_id, since you already have Upstash Redis wired in for the task queue).
Do not block the main ingestion ACK on this reply — the 50ms Telegram ACK requirement (app_state_analysis.md Section 3) is unrelated to this follow-up message and must not be coupled to it.
If the user doesn't reply within the window, proceed with context_note = NULL and let the AI cascade summarize without it. Never block item processing waiting for this reply.
This is the same Redis key pattern as 1.0b's Day 1/2 mapping, with a shorter TTL — one piece of mapping logic, two different trigger points (live save vs. delayed onboarding follow-up). Build the mapping function once and parameterize the TTL, rather than writing two separate implementations.
1.2 — First-Session Magic
The existing louvain_clustering job only runs for users with ≥ 10 new items (app_state_analysis.md Section 5). For a brand-new user this means zero connections surface for potentially days. Fix: add an on-demand check triggered synchronously after the 3rd item is saved for any user with zero prior semantic_hubs rows — run a single pairwise cosine comparison across just that user's existing items (cheap at n=3, this is not the expensive full-graph scan) and fire a confirmed-connection message immediately if any pair scores ≥ 0.75.
This is a special-cased code path, not a lowering of the global threshold — keep the ≥ 10 threshold for the nightly job's clustering quality on larger graphs; only the first-connection moment for new users gets the on-demand path.
1.3 — Thinking Streaks (Schema Correction)
Add last_active_at TIMESTAMP and streak_days INT to semantic_hubs, both computed on read rather than written nightly. The actual query, run when a user opens the Telegram digest or the web dashboard:
SELECT hub_id, label,
  MAX(items.created_at) AS last_active_at,
  CURRENT_DATE - MIN(gap_start) AS streak_days
FROM semantic_hubs
JOIN items ON items.id = ANY(semantic_hubs.member_ids)
WHERE semantic_hubs.user_id = :user_id
GROUP BY hub_id, label
ORDER BY last_active_at DESC;
Where gap_start is derived application-side by walking created_at values per hub and finding the earliest date with no gap greater than 1 day to the next save — this is simplest to compute in Python after the query returns rows, not as a single SQL window function, given the small per-user row counts involved.
Phase 2 — The Insight Candidate Pipeline
2.1 — Schema
CREATE TABLE insight_candidates (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  user_id INT REFERENCES users(id) ON DELETE CASCADE,
  item_id_a INT NOT NULL,
  item_id_b INT NOT NULL,
  similarity_score FLOAT NOT NULL,
  bucket VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL,        -- 'confirmed' | 'near_miss'
  status VARCHAR(20) DEFAULT 'pending',
  -- pending | delivered | expired | confirmed_by_user
  insight_text TEXT,
  expires_at TIMESTAMP,
  cluster_pair_hash VARCHAR(32),      -- for the novelty filter, see 2.3
  created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);
CREATE INDEX idx_candidates_user_status ON insight_candidates(user_id, status);
2.2 — The Nightly Scan (extends louvain_clustering, runs right after it)
After Louvain clustering updates semantic_hubs for the day, run the candidate scan using the same NetworkX graph already in memory from the clustering step — do not rebuild it. For every pair of items belonging to different hubs (cross-cluster pairs are the interesting ones; same-cluster pairs are already known to be related), compute cosine similarity using pgvector's <=> operator directly in SQL rather than pulling vectors into Python:
SELECT a.id, b.id, 1 - (a.embedding <=> b.embedding) AS similarity
FROM items a, items b
WHERE a.user_id = :user_id AND b.user_id = :user_id
  AND a.id < b.id
  AND a.created_at < b.created_at - INTERVAL '14 days'
  AND 1 - (a.embedding <=> b.embedding) >= 0.68
ORDER BY similarity DESC
LIMIT 200;
The 14-day minimum gap is the literal implementation of “far apart in time” from the original vision doc — it was never quantified there. 14 days is a starting point: short enough that most active users will have qualifying pairs within a month of usage, long enough that it doesn't fire on two items saved in the same week of reading about the same topic. Revisit after Phase 0 data, not before.
2.3 — The Novelty Filter
Hash the unordered pair of hub IDs each item belongs to (sort the two hub IDs, concatenate, MD5) and store as cluster_pair_hash. Before inserting a new candidate, check:
SELECT 1 FROM insight_candidates
WHERE user_id = :user_id
  AND cluster_pair_hash = :hash
  AND created_at > NOW() - INTERVAL '60 days'
LIMIT 1;
If a row exists, skip this candidate entirely — do not insert, do not deliver. This is the direct fix to the spam risk identified in Part 1.1: without this check, two large clusters with many cross-pairs would refire the same “connection” every night with a different item pair from the same two clusters, which reads as repetitive to the user even though the literal items differ.
2.4 — Morning Mystery / Evening Answer (replaces daily_digest_sender)
Keep the existing hourly cron pattern (app_state_analysis.md Section 5, daily_digest_sender checks for users in their 8am hour). Change the payload logic only:
Morning (user's local 8am hour): query the highest-similarity pending candidate for this user, mark it delivered with the Morning Mystery template (Part 2.2) — send only the opening line, withhold insight_text.
Evening (user's local 8pm hour, new scheduled check): for any candidate delivered that morning, generate insight_text now (using the Part 4.3 prompt) if not already cached, and send the Evening Answer template with the resolution.
If no pending candidate exists for a user on a given morning, skip the message entirely rather than sending a filler — a quiet morning with no message preserves the credibility of the mechanic for when a real one fires.
Phase 3 — Urgency and Virality
3.1 — Drift Window
On delivering any near_miss or confirmed candidate via Recall Moment (not Morning Mystery, which has its own evening-resolution pattern), set expires_at = NOW() + INTERVAL '6 hours' and status = 'delivered'. Add a check to the existing reminders_dispatcher job (already running every 1 minute per app_state_analysis.md Section 5 — reuse this interval rather than adding a new one):
UPDATE insight_candidates
SET status = 'expired'
WHERE status = 'delivered' AND expires_at < NOW();
Once status = 'expired', no code path may read this row for display again — enforce this as a WHERE status != 'expired' clause on every query that surfaces candidates to the user, not as a soft convention. The countdown's credibility depends entirely on expiry being real and enforced at the data layer, not just at the message-copy layer.
3.2 — Recall Moment Cadence
Max one delivery per user per rolling 7 days. Track via a simple check against insight_candidates.created_at WHERE bucket='confirmed' AND status IN ('delivered','expired') — if any row exists in the last 7 days, skip delivery even if a new qualifying candidate exists; it carries to the following eligible day. Randomize the actual send hour within a 6-hour window (e.g. uniformly between 10am–4pm local) rather than a fixed hour, so it doesn't read as scheduled.
3.3 — Near-Miss Threshold Calibration Procedure
Starting band: 0.68–0.75 (below 0.75 confirmed-cutoff, above a noise floor). After two weeks of production data, pull every near_miss candidate and check what fraction were later confirmed (a later item pushed the same hub-pair above 0.75 within 14 days). If fewer than 20% convert, the band is too low — narrow it to 0.71–0.75. If more than 60% convert almost immediately, the band may be too close to the confirmed cutoff to feel like a meaningfully separate near-miss — widen it slightly. This is an empirical tuning loop, not a one-time decision.
Phase 4 — Identity Layer
4.1 — Mind Type
Compute alongside the nightly Louvain job using graph statistics already available post-clustering: number of distinct hubs touched in the last 30 days (cross-domain breadth), max single-hub size relative to total items (depth concentration), ratio of cross-hub candidate pairs to same-hub pairs (pattern-hunting signal). Cache the result string to users.mind_type; only overwrite if the computed type differs from the cached value, so the change itself (Part 1.2's trajectory requirement) is detectable by comparing old vs. new on each run.
4.2 — Self-Description Input
Add a one-time onboarding question after the user's first 5 items: “In one sentence, what do you think you're mostly interested in right now?” Store verbatim in a new users.self_description TEXT column. This is the only honest input Confession Feature can compare against — do not infer a self-description from early saves, since that would make the “confession” circular (comparing the graph to itself).
4.3 — Confession Feature
Run only when users.self_description is non-null and the user has ≥ 30 items. Feed the self-description plus a summary of the top 3 hubs by item count to the Part 4.3 prompt family, with an added instruction: “compare the stated self-description to the actual hub distribution; if they substantially diverge, state the gap directly; if they align, output ALIGNED_NO_GAP and do not force a confession.” Never fire this more than once per 30 days per user — it is high-impact and loses force with repetition.
Phase 5 — Quantified Identity and Social
5.1 — Pulse Score Formula
Concrete formula, not just “nodes × connections”: 
pulse = (total_items * 1.0)
      + (total_confirmed_candidates * 3.0)
      + (distinct_hubs_active_30d * 5.0)
      - (stale_hubs_30d * 4.0)

where stale_hubs_30d = hubs with zero new member items in 30 days
This formula deliberately weights distinct active hubs (breadth + recency) over raw item count, and explicitly subtracts for staleness — this is what makes the score capable of decaying (Part 1.2) rather than only ever climbing, which the original vision doc requires but never specified arithmetically. Treat these weights as a first draft to tune after Phase 0–3 data exists, not as fixed constants.
5.2 — Cluster Portrait
Trigger on any semantic_hubs row reaching member_ids array length ≥ 8 for the first time (check on each Louvain run; track via a portrait_generated BOOLEAN column on semantic_hubs to avoid regenerating on every subsequent run once already fired).
5.3 — Thought Compatibility Permission Model
Add a users_compatibility_links table (user_id, linked_user_id, status: pending/accepted) requiring explicit two-sided opt-in before any cross-user graph read occurs — this is a hard requirement given the existing IDOR-conscious posture (app_state_analysis.md Section 8); a comparison feature is the one place in this entire plan where one user's data is intentionally exposed to another, and it must never default to anything but explicit, revocable, two-sided consent.
Phase 6 — Long-Tail Identity
Monthly Prediction and Public Graph are unchanged from the original plan — these are lower-risk, presentation-layer-only additions that don't need the same prompt/schema depth as Phases 1–5, and are better specified once real usage data from those phases exists to predict from.

Phase Summary Table
Phase
Ships
Depends On
0
Eval rubric + validated prompt (≥ 15/20 pass, Tier 0/1 and Tier 2)
Nothing — do this first
1
Batching fix, WhatsApp screenshot bridge, Day 1–5 sequence, context_note, first-session path, streak query
Phase 0 prompt (for context_note quality)
2
insight_candidates table, nightly scan, novelty filter, Morning Mystery rewrite
Phase 1 context_note
3
Drift Window expiry enforcement, Recall Moment cadence, near-miss band
Phase 2 pipeline
4
Mind Type, self_description column, Confession Feature
Phase 2 pipeline + clustering
5
Pulse formula, Cluster Portrait, compatibility opt-in model
Phase 4 identity layer
6
Monthly Prediction, Public Graph
Phase 5 maturity — needs node volume

Part 6 — Surface Mapping: Telegram vs. Dashboard, Mechanic by Mechanic
Every mechanic specified in Parts 1–3 and 3.5 was written as a Telegram message. None of it was mapped onto the existing web dashboard — the real, built, tested Three.js constellation graph and D3.js visualization described in app_state_analysis.md. This is a genuine gap, not a finishing touch: several of the strongest mechanics in this document are weaker as plain text than they would be as something seen and felt, and the dashboard currently has no addiction architecture mapped onto it at all.
6.1 The Design Discipline Being Applied
Two questions, asked honestly per mechanic rather than performed as a style: does this need physical weight to be felt, not just stated — the instinct behind spatial, motion-driven interfaces where interaction has consequence rather than just displaying state. And: does this affordance earn its pixel — the instinct behind interfaces built on restraint, where every visual element is functional, not decorative, and the small states (a transition, a hover, a decay) carry as much intent as the macro layout. Neither question defaults to ‘put it on the dashboard’ or ‘keep it in chat’ — each mechanic is judged on what it actually needs.
6.2 The Mapping
Mechanic
Surface
Why
Drift Window
Dashboard (primary) + Telegram (alert only)
The countdown is the entire mechanic — a sentence with “6 hours” in it is stated, not felt. The decaying edge needs to be seen decaying.
Recall Moment
Telegram (primary) + Dashboard (afterimage)
A revelation wants to interrupt, which chat does well. The dashboard's job is to leave evidence behind, not deliver the moment.
Morning Mystery / Evening Answer
Telegram only
This is explicitly a Zeigarnik-gap mechanic built on absence — withholding the resolution. A dashboard tab the user can peek at defeats the withholding.
Mind Type
Dashboard (primary)
An identity label that changes weekly needs to show its own history — the trajectory is the hook (Part 1.2), and trajectories want a timeline, not a single chat line.
Pulse Score
Dashboard (primary), Telegram only on sharp drops
A number that moves daily wants to be glanced at, not narrated every time. Reserve Telegram for actual loss-aversion moments, not routine updates.
Cluster Portrait
Dashboard (primary) + Telegram (notification only)
This is a generated artifact people will want to revisit and compare over time — chat is a poor archive for that; the notification just points at it.
Confession Feature
Telegram (delivery) + Dashboard (evidence)
The confrontation needs chat's directness and inability to be casually scrolled past. The cluster distribution it's citing belongs on the dashboard as proof, viewed after the fact.
Near-miss
Telegram only
Low-stakes, frequent-ish, disposable. Putting this on the dashboard would clutter the one surface meant to feel considered and rare.
Thought Compatibility
Dashboard (primary)
A two-graph comparison is inherently spatial — this is the one mechanic that's almost unbuildable as text and was likely always assumed to be visual without it being said.
Weekly Card
Dashboard (generates) + shareable export
Needs to be a designed artifact, not a chat message — this is the viral/social mechanic and its shareability depends on it looking considered.
Day 1–5 Onboarding Sequence
Telegram only, inline buttons not typed replies
Tap-precision matters here specifically because Part 3.5 is trying to minimize friction — a typed reply is friction a button removes.

6.3 The One Correction This Forces on Part 3.5
Inline buttons, not typed replies — fix this before building Phase 1.0b:
Day 1's question (“was this for you, or were you planning to act on it or share it with someone?”) was specified as something the user types a sentence in response to. It should be two Telegram inline keyboard buttons instead — a one-tap answer, not a typed one. This directly contradicts Part 3.5's own stated goal of minimizing friction in the first week, and it was missed because every session up to this point defaulted to plain-text message design without ever asking whether Telegram's actual UI surface (inline keyboards, callback buttons) was being used at all. Implementation note: Telegram bot APIs support InlineKeyboardMarkup with callback_data — the button press arrives as a callback_query, not a message, so the existing pending_context mapping logic needs a second code path for button-driven answers, not just text replies.
6.4 Drift Window — Two Real Options, Not a Default
This is the mechanic most weakened by being text-only, so it's worth showing both a conservative extension of the existing graph and a purpose-built alternative, rather than assuming the answer.
Option A — Extend the existing Three.js constellation
The two nodes forming the at-risk connection pulse with a visibly thinning, color-draining edge between them — the edge's opacity and saturation tick down in real time toward the actual expires_at timestamp already in the schema (Part 3.2). When the user opens the dashboard during an active Drift Window, this is immediately visible without any separate countdown UI — the decay is happening to the actual graph object it concerns, not a number next to it.
Pro: zero new visual language — reuses the graph the user already has a relationship with, so the stakes feel like they belong to ‘my graph,’ not to a notification.
Con: only visible if the user opens the dashboard at all during the window — for a mechanic whose entire job is creating urgency, depending on the user proactively opening a separate surface is a real weakness, which is why the Telegram alert in 6.2's mapping is necessary as the actual trigger, with the dashboard as where the urgency is then felt.
Option B — A purpose-built decay view, separate from the main graph
A focused, single-purpose screen (or modal over the dashboard) showing only the at-risk pair — the two items, the literal connecting insight text once generated, and a visual depletion bar or particle effect that empties over the real time window. Closer to a single-serving ritual than a glance at a busy graph.
Pro: undivided attention on the one thing that matters during this window — the full constellation graph is visually busy and a thinning edge among hundreds of others may simply not register.
Con: a new visual component to design and maintain, and it risks feeling like a separate gimmick rather than something that belongs to the graph the user already trusts.
Recommendation if forced to choose now, low-confidence: start with Option A, since it's cheaper to build (extends existing Three.js scene rather than adding a new view) and the Telegram alert already solves Option A's main weakness. Revisit Option B only if usage data after Phase 3 shows the Telegram alert isn't driving dashboard opens during the window.
6.5 Mind Type — Two Real Options
Option A — A trajectory timeline strip
A horizontal strip at the top of the dashboard showing the last 8–12 weeks of Mind Type labels in sequence, with the current one visually distinct (larger, brighter) from the trailing history. The user can see their own drift across labels at a glance — this is the literal visualization of Part 1.2's “the change is the hook, not the label” principle.
Option B — A blended/morphing type, not discrete labels
Instead of discrete labels that snap from “Depth Seeker” to “Connector,” render Mind Type as a position on a continuous 2D plane (e.g. axes for breadth vs. depth, and stability vs. novelty-seeking), with the current position as a dot and a faint trailing path showing recent movement — closer to a personality-space visualization than a label history.
Option A is more shareable (a label is screenshot-friendly, a position on an abstract plane is not) and far cheaper to build.
Option B is more honest to the underlying computation (Part 5, Phase 4.1 already computes continuous graph statistics, not discrete categories) but asks more of the user to interpret, and abstract 2D plots are a known weak point for casual engagement — most people don't intuitively read scatter positions the way they read a word.
Recommendation: Option A for the dashboard—label history is what gets shared and remembered— but keep computing the continuous statistics from Option B underneath, so a future Weekly Card or Cluster Portrait can reference the more precise underlying position even while the user-facing label stays simple.
6.6 Pulse Score — Why the Obvious Choice Is Wrong
The default instinct is a gauge or progress bar. Reject this — a generic gauge doesn't earn its pixel, because Pulse isn't actually a single quantity the user needs to monitor like a battery level, it's a proxy for graph vitality (Part 5, Phase 5.1's formula: items, confirmed connections, active hub breadth, minus staleness). The number alone hides which of those four components is driving a change, which is exactly the information that would make the decay feel earned rather than arbitrary.
Better direction: render Pulse as the overall brightness/glow intensity of the entire constellation graph itself, not a separate number anywhere. A graph that's dimmer this week than last week is felt without being read, and clicking into it reveals the four-component breakdown for whoever wants the detail. This also means Pulse never needs its own dedicated screen — it's an ambient property of the one view the user already returns to.
6.7 Thought Compatibility — the One Mechanic That Was Always Visual
Two overlapping or paired constellations, with shared/resonant cluster pairs highlighted where the two graphs' themes overlap, and each person's unique territory left in their own graph's color. This was likely assumed to be visual from the original vision doc's framing (“you go wide, they go deep”) without anyone stating that the only way to make that claim land is to let the user see both shapes side by side — a paragraph of text asserting it is a strictly weaker version of the same claim shown.

Part 7 — New Features and Revamps Surfaced by This Process
Working through the surface mapping above surfaced ideas that don't fit neatly into the existing 14-mechanic list — either genuinely new features, or arguments for revamping something already specified.
7.1 New — The Edge, Not the Node, as the Primary Visual Object
Every mechanic in this document up to now treats items/nodes as the primary thing being visualized, with connections as secondary lines between them. Drift Window (6.4) and Thought Compatibility (6.7) both work because the *connection* is the thing with stakes — not the items themselves. This suggests a dashboard revamp worth considering on its own merits, independent of any single mechanic: make edges, not nodes, the dashboard's primary interactive object — clicking an edge (not a node) is what surfaces an insight, a Drift countdown, or a confirmed-connection's origin story. This single change would make several mechanics above feel native to the graph instead of bolted onto it.
7.2 New — A “Why Now” Trace on Every Insight
Every insight-delivery mechanic (Recall Moment, Morning Mystery, Confession) currently delivers a conclusion without showing its own reasoning path. A small, optional “why now” affordance — tap to see the two source items, the similarity score, and the days-apart gap that produced this specific insight — would do two things: it makes the eval-quality bar from Part 4 directly checkable by the user themselves (if the insight feels generic, the trace reveals whether the underlying pair was actually weak), and it turns a passive insight into something the user can verify, which is a stronger trust mechanic than asserting accuracy ever can be.
7.3 Revamp — Confession Feature Needs a Softer Landing on the Dashboard
Per 6.2, Confession Feature delivers via Telegram but the cluster-distribution evidence belongs on the dashboard afterward. Worth being explicit that this dashboard view needs its own restrained design pass — showing someone the literal gap between their stated self-description and their actual saved-item distribution is the single most reputationally risky moment in the entire product (Part 5, Phase 4.3 already flags this), and a dashboard view that renders this as anything resembling a score, a grade, or a gamified ‘gotcha’ graphic would undercut the entire restraint this document has tried to maintain since Part 1.2's diagnostic-language boundary. This should look like quiet evidence, not a scoreboard.
7.4 New — A Dashboard-Native Near-Miss Hover State
Per 6.2, near-misses stay Telegram-only to avoid cluttering the dashboard. A cheaper alternative worth considering instead of full exclusion: render near-miss pairs as a faint, almost-invisible edge between two nodes — visible only on hover or only at low opacity — rather than not rendering them at all. This keeps the dashboard's primary view uncluttered (Rauno's restraint) while still rewarding someone who spends time exploring their own graph with a small “almost” discovery they weren't told about, which is closer to the variable-reward near-miss mechanism described in Part 1.1 than a Telegram message ever was — a near-miss a person finds themselves, by looking closely, is a stronger version of the same psychology than one delivered to them.
7.5 Revamp — Weekly Card Should Be Generated From the Dashboard's Own Visual Language, Not a Separate Template
Part 5, Phase 5.2 specifies Weekly Card as “a rendered image/template combining Mind Type + obsession + streak + Pulse + sharpest insight line,” implicitly as its own design object. Given 6.5 and 6.6 above now define visual languages for Mind Type (timeline strip) and Pulse (graph glow), the Weekly Card should be built as a literal snapshot/export of the dashboard's own current visual state, captioned with the sharpest insight line — not a separately designed card competing with the dashboard's own visual identity. This is both cheaper to build (reuses existing render logic) and more credible to share, since it's visibly a screenshot of something real rather than a generated marketing asset.
Part 8 — Five Missing Mechanics: Friction Reduction and Depth
Working through Parts 6 and 7 surfaced a structural gap: every mechanic in this document is either a delivery wrapper around insight generation or a retention lever for users who already have a saving habit. There is nothing that collapses the capture friction at the moment an idea actually occurs, nothing that uses passive context the pipeline already has access to but discards, nothing for the gap between 5 and 30 nodes where onboarding ends but real addiction mechanics haven’t activated yet, nothing that reads temporal rhythm as signal, nothing forward-looking, and no conversational interface. This part adds all five.

8.1 Save-From-Anywhere — The Missing Zero-Friction Input
Every input mechanic in Parts 1–7 requires opening Telegram. That is one context switch too many for the moment an idea actually hits. The highest-friction moment in any knowledge tool is the gap between “I just thought of something” and “I’ve captured it.” The Chrome extension partially solves this for web content on desktop. There is nothing for the phone — which is where most users are when an idea hits them.

Why this matters more than any other friction fix:
The onboarding sequence, the WhatsApp screenshot bridge, and the Day 1–5 sequence all reduce friction after the user has already decided to open Telegram. Save-from-anywhere reduces friction at the moment before that decision — at the exact point where most ideas are lost. It is the only input mechanic that competes with the default behavior (do nothing, forget it).

Implementation
iOS and Android share sheet handler: a lightweight app or deep link handler registered as a share target. When a user shares any content (URL, screenshot, highlighted text, voice memo) from any other app, it hits the same Recall ingest API that the Telegram bot uses — no Telegram switch, no copy-paste, no screenshot required. The item flows through the existing AI cascade unchanged.

Share sheet registration: iOS uses a Share Extension target in Xcode; Android uses an intent filter in the manifest with action SEND and type text/* or image/*. Both can be minimal — no full app UI required, just a system share handler that POSTs to the Recall API and shows a brief confirmation.
Authentication: use the same Telegram user_id tied to a short-lived API token stored in the share extension’s keychain. On first use, the share sheet shows a one-time pairing screen (scan QR from the Telegram bot, or enter a 6-digit code). After pairing, it is invisible.
Fallback for users who won’t install a separate app: a Recall URL scheme (recall://save?text=...) that Telegram itself can trigger via inline buttons. Lower friction than switching apps, higher than a native share sheet, but zero additional installation required.
This is the single highest-ROI friction reduction not yet in the document. Build after the Chrome extension is stable, before any other new input mechanic.

8.2 Passive Context Object — Context Without Asking
The one-sentence context prompt is load-bearing but is an explicit ask. Approximately 40–60% of saves will receive no reply. The pipeline currently treats no-reply saves as blank — context_note NULL, only title/summary/tags fed to insight generation. This is an unnecessary information loss, because there is passive context already available at ingest time that the pipeline discards without reading.

The passive context available on every save, currently unused:
Time of day and day of week. What the user saved in the preceding 24 hours (prior cluster activity). Whether this item arrived via OCR screenshot, URL, text paste, or voice transcription (input method). How long since the user’s last save (session gap in hours). None of this requires asking the user anything. All of it is already in the request context at the moment the ingest webhook fires.

Implementation
Build a passive_context JSON object alongside every item at ingest time, stored as a new nullable JSONB column on items. The object shape:

time_of_day: morning (6–11), afternoon (12–17), evening (18–22), night (23–5)
day_of_week: weekday or weekend
prior_cluster_activity_24h: list of semantic_hub labels the user saved to in the preceding 24 hours, pulled from items.created_at + hub membership at ingest time
input_method: screenshot | url | text | voice
session_gap_hours: hours since the user’s last save, computed from MAX(created_at) for that user

Feed this object to the insight generation prompt as a “weak signal frame” — not replacing context_note, but supplementing when context_note is NULL. The model instruction: “If context_note is present, treat it as primary intent signal. If absent, use the passive_context object as a weak prior — for example, a save made at 11pm after a run of philosophy saves carries different intent than the same content saved at 9am in isolation.” This does not guarantee better output on every save. It reduces the fraction of saves where the model has nothing to work with beyond the content itself.

8.3 Mid-Graph Re-Engagement — The 5–30 Node Gap
The document has a hard stop on the Day 1–5 onboarding sequence once the user reaches 5 nodes or goes silent for two days. The real addiction mechanics (Morning Mystery, Recall Moment, Drift Window) do not reliably activate until the graph has 15–30 nodes with confirmed cross-cluster connections. There is currently nothing for the gap between those two states: a user with 8 nodes who saved well in week one and then drifted has exhausted onboarding and not yet reached the threshold where any other mechanic fires.

Why this gap is fatal for retention:
A user who drifts in the 5–30 node window is not retained by the addiction architecture — it hasn’t activated for them yet. They are also past the onboarding sequence, so no scaffolding exists to re-engage them. This is the gap where most potentially-retained users are lost. It is not addressed anywhere in Parts 1–7.

The Mid-Graph Re-Engagement Message
Trigger condition: user has 5–30 nodes AND has not saved anything in 5 days AND has not received a Morning Mystery or Recall Moment (graph not dense enough). Fires once per 10-day window, not more. Hard stop: if the user has gone silent for 14+ days, do not fire — the relationship has not been established enough to earn a third unprompted contact after that gap.

Message template:
Example mid-graph re-engagement message:
“You saved something about [literal title of most recent item] five days ago. Did it turn into anything, or is it still just an idea?”

Implementation: same pending_context:{chat_id} → item_id Redis mapping used in the Day 1–5 sequence, with a 12-hour reply window. Any substantive reply writes to context_note on that item — enriching an existing node, not creating a new one. If the reply contains clearly new content (different subject), route it through the normal new-item save path instead. This distinction is the same one Phase 1.0b already enforces between Day 1/2 replies (context enrichment) and Day 3–5 replies (new node) — reuse the same branching logic, parameterized on the trigger context.

Silence is always a valid outcome and is respected. One unanswered mid-graph message does not trigger another. The sequence only re-arms after the user saves something new, resetting the 5-day counter.

8.4 Temporal Rhythm as Signal — When You Save Is Part of What You Save
The document uses temporal distance between saves (the 14-day minimum gap in the pairwise scan) as a quality filter. There is a richer signal in the temporal metadata that is not used anywhere: the pattern of when a user saves — not just what they save — carries information about context, mental state, and what they think about when unprompted.

The insight this unlocks:
A user who consistently saves things about one particular cluster between 10pm and midnight is telling you something about what they think about when the day is done and the noise is gone. A user who saves work content on Monday mornings and philosophical content on Sunday evenings has a rhythm. This is information no other product surfaces, because no other product has both the temporal metadata and the semantic clustering to read them together.

Implementation
The data is already in items.created_at. The semantic_hub membership is already computed. The only new work is the analysis and the delivery mechanic.

Add a weekly rhythm analysis job (runs Sunday evening, extending the existing APScheduler pattern). For each user with ≥ 20 items, compute: which clusters are saved predominantly in which time-of-day bucket (morning / evening / night). Flag any cluster where ≥ 70% of its items were saved within the same 3-hour window across at least 3 different days.
Deliver as a once-per-month observation, framed as a discovery not a report. Message template: “You only ever think about [cluster label] late at night. Every single save in that thread was after 10pm. Your graph noticed.”
Constraints: only fire when the pattern is statistically clear (≥ 70% concentration in one window, ≥ 4 qualifying saves). Never fire on thin data. A weak pattern stated with false certainty is the same calibration failure as a weak insight stated as fact — treat it identically under the Part 4.5 rubric.
Store rhythm metadata in a new items.save_time_bucket column (populated at ingest, values: morning/afternoon/evening/night) to avoid recomputing from raw timestamps on every analysis run.

This mechanic is cheap to build (one new column, one new weekly job, one new message template), high-surprise in output, and impossible for any other product to replicate without both semantic clustering and temporal indexing. It should be prioritized above several mechanics in Part 5’s build order for that reason.

8.5 The Forward Hook — What the Graph Says You Should Think About Next
Every mechanic in Parts 1–7 is backward-looking. Morning Mystery reveals a connection between things already saved. Recall Moment surfaces a cross-temporal link. Confession compares past saves to a past self-description. The Monthly Prediction is the one forward-facing mechanic, but it predicts what the user will save — not what they should be thinking about that they haven’t yet.

The forward hook mechanic inverts this: after clustering, identify adjacent concept spaces to the user’s most active clusters that are conspicuously absent from the graph. The absence is the signal. A user with 12 nodes about stoicism and 8 about productivity but zero nodes touching recovery, rest, or sustainability has a visible gap in an otherwise coherent framework. That gap is something worth naming.

Why this is a different kind of return trigger:
Every backward-looking mechanic creates the trigger “I want to see what my graph found.” The forward hook creates a different trigger: “I want to close the loop on what my graph said I was building toward.” These are psychologically distinct. One is curiosity about the past. The other is a sense of incompleteness about the future — which is closer to the Zeigarnik effect than any mechanic in Part 2, because the open loop is one the user themselves is now aware of.

Implementation
Run once per month per user, alongside the Monthly Prediction job. Requires the user to have ≥ 15 nodes across ≥ 3 distinct clusters (enough for a pattern to be visible and a gap to be meaningful).

Compute the embedding centroid of the user’s top 3 clusters by item count. Run a nearest-neighbor search in the embedding space against a curated set of concept-space centroids (approximately 200 general knowledge domains, pre-embedded and stored as a static reference table). Find the top 5 concept spaces nearest to the user’s cluster centroids that have zero or near-zero item representation in the user’s graph.
Score each candidate gap by: proximity to existing clusters (how natural the extension is) minus novelty penalty (how far it is from anything the user has touched). The highest-scoring gap is the one to surface — the adjacent-but-absent space, not a random new domain.
Message template: “Your graph has been building a framework for [theme derived from top clusters]. The one piece it hasn’t touched: [gap concept]. Everything you’ve saved assumes [the implicit assumption the gap reveals].”
Constraints: maximum once per 30 days. Never fire if the gap concept is something the user has explicitly saved and discarded (check against items.tags and items.summary for the concept, not just the embedding distance). Stated with the same calibrated confidence rule as all other insight mechanics — if the gap is borderline, say so: “Your graph is light on [X] — could be deliberate, could be a gap.”

8.6 Conversational Graph Interface — The User Interrogates the Graph
Every mechanic in this document treats the user as a recipient. Recall surfaces something; the user receives it. The graph is the oracle; the user watches. The comparable market has moved in a different direction: the validated mechanism in AI self-reflection products (Rosebud, Mindsera, Reflection — cited in Part 3.4.2) is active, guided, conversational interaction, not passive inference from incidentally-saved content. This mechanic closes that gap.

What this unlocks that nothing else in the document does:
A user who can ask their graph a question and get a specific, evidence-grounded answer is using a fundamentally different product from one who waits for Recall to surface something. The former is a thinking tool. The latter is a notification service with better copy. Both are real products. The conversational interface makes Recall the former.

Implementation
This is RAG (retrieval-augmented generation) over the user’s own graph — the pgvector HNSW index already supports this; the pipeline already exists. The new work is the conversational interface and the instruction to the model to answer from graph evidence rather than general knowledge.

Trigger: user sends a message to the Telegram bot that is phrased as a question (simple heuristic: starts with a question word, ends with ?, or is parsed as interrogative by the existing AI cascade’s intent classifier). If no pending_context mapping exists for that chat_id, route to the conversational graph handler instead of the normal save path.
Handler: embed the user’s question using the existing all-MiniLM-L6-v2 embedder. Run a nearest-neighbor search against that user’s items table (scoped to user_id — never cross-user). Retrieve the top 8–12 items by cosine similarity. Feed them as context to the insight generation prompt with an additional instruction: “The user has asked a question about their own thinking. Answer ONLY from the retrieved items below. Do not use general knowledge. If the retrieved items do not contain enough signal to answer the question, say so directly rather than inferring.”
Output format: 2–4 sentences, same specificity rules as all other insight output (Part 4.3 and Part 4.5 rubric apply). Must name the literal retrieved items. Must not exceed the diagnostic-language boundary. Must state when evidence is thin.
Example interaction — user types: “why do I keep coming back to control as a theme?” — system response: “Your graph has 14 saves touching control across 4 clusters since March. The two that appear most: systems that fail without oversight, and creative work that requires surrendering it. You’re not interested in control generally — you’re interested in the specific places where it’s unavailable.”
Items retrieved for conversational queries are not saved as new nodes. The query itself is logged (with a query_type: conversational flag) for future use in understanding what questions users ask their graphs — this is high-value product data that does not exist in any comparable product.

What This Changes About the Product Positioning
A product the user can question is categorically different from a product that delivers observations. It changes the relationship from “Recall watches me and tells me things” to “Recall knows my thinking and I can ask it things.” The second framing is the one that produces the deepest retention — not because it is more magical, but because it is more useful in a moment of active thinking, not just in a moment of passive receiving.

This is also the mechanic most likely to produce the word-of-mouth trigger that Part 1.3 identifies as the real acquisition engine: a user who gets a specific, graph-grounded answer to a question they’ve been carrying around for weeks will tell someone. Not because the product is impressive — because it was useful at a moment when nothing else was.

8.7 Revised Build Order for Part 8 Mechanics
These five mechanics integrate into the existing Phase structure from Part 5. The ordering below reflects dependencies and retention ROI.

Passive context object (8.2): build in Phase 1 alongside the context prompt (1.1). One new column, zero new jobs, no new delivery mechanic. Highest-leverage lowest-cost addition in this section — it upgrades every future insight without requiring any other Part 8 mechanic to be live.
Mid-graph re-engagement (8.3): build in Phase 1 alongside the Day 1–5 sequence (1.0b). Reuses the same pending_context mapping infrastructure. Closes the retention gap that the onboarding sequence leaves open — build immediately after 1.0b is stable.
Conversational graph interface (8.6): build in Phase 2 alongside the Insight Candidate Pipeline (2.1). Requires the pgvector index and the AI cascade to be stable. This is the highest-retention mechanic in Part 8 and should be treated as a Phase 2 deliverable, not a Phase 5 nice-to-have.
Temporal rhythm mechanic (8.4): build in Phase 3. Requires a stable clustering result and enough items per user to compute meaningful time-of-day patterns. One new column (save_time_bucket), one new weekly job.
Forward hook (8.5): build in Phase 4 alongside Mind Type and Confession (Phase 4.1–4.3). Requires a stable multi-cluster graph and the concept-space centroid reference table. The reference table is a one-time offline computation — embed 200 general knowledge domains, store as a static pgvector table, never changes.
Save-from-anywhere (8.1): build in Phase 5 alongside the social mechanics. This is a distribution mechanic, not a retention mechanic — it acquires users more than it retains them, which makes it correctly sequenced after the retention architecture is proven to work.
